We define leadership as the ability to influence a group toward the
achievement of a vision or set of goals. The source of this influence may be
formal, such as that provided by managerial rank in an organization. But
not all leaders are managers, nor, for that matter, are all managers leaders.
Just because an organization provides its managers with certain formal
rights is no assurance they will lead effectively. Nonsanctioned leadershipthe
ability to influence that arises outside the formal structure of the
organization-is often as important or more important than formal influence.
In other words, leaders can emerge from within a group as well as by
formal appointment.
Organizations need strong leadership and strong management for optimal
effectiveness. We need leaders today to challenge the status quo, create visions
of the future, and inspire organizational members to want to achieve the
visions. We also need managers to formulate detailed plans, create efficient
organizational structures, and oversee day-to-day operations.
Throughout history, strong leaders-Buddha, Napoleon, Mao, Churchill,
Roosevelt, Reagan-have been described in terms of their traits. Trait theories
of leadership thus focus on personal qualities and characteristics. We recognize
leaders like South Africa's Nelson Mandela, Virgin Group CEO Richard
Branson, Apple co-founder Steve Jobs, and American Express chairman Ken
Chenault as charismatic, enthusiastic, and courageous. The search for personality,
social, physical, or intellectual attributes that differentiate leaders from nonleaders
goes back to the earliest stages of leadership research.
Early research efforts to isolate leadership traits resulted in a number of
dead ends. A review in the late 1960s of 20 different studies identified nearly
80 leadership traits, but only 5 were common to 4 or more of the investigations. 2
By the 1990s, after numerous studies and analyses, about the best we could say
was that most leaders "are not like other people," but the particular traits that
characterized them varied a great deal from review to review.3 It was a pretty
confusing state of affairs.
A breakthrough, of sorts, came when researchers began organizing traits
around the Big Five personality framework (see Chapter 5).4 Most of the dozens
of traits in various leadership reviews fit under one of the Big Five (ambition
and energy are part of extraversion, for instance), giving strong support to traits
as predictors of leadership.